# Drop-In HotEnd Replacements

One of the more popular 3D printer mods is to swap out the stock HotEnd for something better. Here's a [Backgrounder on Hotends](https://github.com/500Foods/WelcomeToTroodon/blob/main/docs/level_0/hotends.md) if you want to brush up on the various parts of a HotEnd. But why would we want to replace a HotEnd? Well, lots of reasons, actually.

- **Quicker heating.** Stock HotEnds typically are inexpensive, meaning that they have a small heat block and low-power heater which, in combination, means that it takes an eternity for the HotEnd to reach the desired temperature. This is particularly important if you print with high-temperature filaments like ABS or ASA, as reaching higher temperatures takes much longer - it is typically not a linear heating curve.
- **Higher temperatures.** Most of the time, the stock HotEnd will be able to achieve and maintain a suitable temperature for at least the most common filaments, but perhaps at reduced speeds. Sometimes, though, you might want to print at higher temperatures to address various issues, like higher flow rates, or to achieve better bed adhesion or layer adhesion, and so on. Having that extra bit of room at the top end of the temperature curve is sometimes very important.
- **More Power.** The heater in a HotEnd is usually limited in its power output. Say, 48W at 24V, that sort of thing. Sometimes, more power is needed to meet whatever criteria, like higher temperatures or higher flow rates, necessitating the need to replace the HotEnd entirely, or perhaps the heater part of the HotEnd, or sometimes even the wiring, to support the supply of more current.
- **Higher flow rate.** This is often the goal - being able to print faster. As cold filament enters the heat block to be melted, it cools the heat block a little, so the printer supplies more power to maintain that temperature. HotEnds with larger heat blocks (a larger reservoir of melted filament) can therefore more easily maintain a supply of melted filament, and can thus provide a higher flow rate and faster print speed.

Note that these are often interconnected. Having a higher-powered heater (say 60W vs 48W) means that the heat block will reach its target temperature faster. Which also means that it can achieve a higher flow rate, even if that's not the original goal. Often the HotEnd that ships with a pre-assembled printer, or a printer kit, will be on the lower end of the scale. Better HotEnds can be purchased for anywhere from $20-$30 for a replacement HotEnd, to hundreds of dollars for a fancy super-high-end water-cooled HotEnd.

For our purposes here, though, we're interested in what HotEnds can be swapped in without having to fall into the trap of endlessly upgrading everything else in the toolhead or the rest of the printer just to get it to work. Let's take our typical Troodon 2.0 Pro example of a stock StealthBurner with an E3D V6 HotEnd. This is a HotEnd that is equipped with a 40W heater as stock, and can reach high enough temperatures to print ABS and ASA without problems, just not very quickly. Similar replacements are readily available. This is sometimes referred to as a J-Head V6 HotEnd.
- Amazon 🇨🇦 - [Compatible J-Head V6 24V 40W HotEnd](https://a.co/d/5WuQlDV)

But there are some limitations we need to be mindful of here, and some are specific to this printer.

1. The default PRINTER_START script (and the version provided [here](https://github.com/500Foods/WelcomeToTroodon/blob/main/macros/PRINT_START.md)) go through a little dance of heating up to print temperature (say, 260C), performing a NOZZLE_CLEAN, dropping to 150C to do a Quad-Gantry-Levelling, and then heating back up to print temperatures again, all before printing anything at all. With the stock HotEnd, this can take an agonizingly long time. So long that people start stripping out those parts of PRINT_START just to avoid doing them. This isn't good as those steps are part of the script on purpose, with valid reasons behind each part of the process.
2. When printing with higher temperatures, it can similarly take a really long time to reach those temperatures.
3. When trying to print faster, this particular HotEnd is a key limiting factor in that it can only sustain a flow rate around 10mm3/s, depending on the temperature and filament used.
4. The stock Troodon has been designed to support no more than 60W for its heater wiring. This limitation comes from the breakout board in the back of the printer, where the connectors used can only support a current load of 2.5A (2.5 * 24V = 60W). While it is *possible* to provide more power with this stock wiring, it is not a good idea and will *very likely* result in bigger problems down the road. Like needing to replace the breakout board when the connectors fail. Or worse.

So let's explore three options for replacing the HotEnd where we don't need to re-print any parts of the StealthBurner toolhead, and where we don't need to change any wires other than what is in the toolhead itself, and we don't need to replace any other components. As a bonus, we can still continue to use the same V6 nozzles. This is by no means an exhaustive list, and if you were to lift any of those restrictions, dozens more HotEnds would also be usable. For example, just printing a new StealthBurner part would open up access to a number of Bambu HotEnds. But we have to start somewhere, right? Similarly, there are other HotEnds that could be used if you wanted to use something other than V6 nozzles. Plenty of ways to mix and match parts here.

## Upgrade #1 - Better Heat Block
The main reason to choose this option is to reach temperatures faster. Relatively speaking, this heater is almost instant. And it cools faster as well, which is almost as important when doing the little PRINT_STARTUP temperature dance. It is also a simpler design with the heater and thermistor wires embedded directly in the heat block, making for a very tidy set up. 

- Amazon 🇨🇦 - [CHC Ceramic 48W 24V HotEnd](https://a.co/d/j8khpfI)

To get this up and running, the main challenge is in adjusting the length of the heater wire. They're really long, far too long to just bundle up inside the toolhead. If you've got some wire crimpers and some ferrule ends to crimp, this is a trivial task. Likewise, if you like soldering, removing the wire and soldering the ends together isn't difficult. Otherwise, it is a bit of a nuisance to have to fiddle with the wires. Note that there is no polarity with either heater or thermistor wires. Once those are dealt with, replacing the stock HotEnd with this one is really just a drop-in replacement. Everything fits where it needs to fit, and you don't need to print any custom StealthBurner parts to get it to work.

The other thing to be mindful of is that this will very likely use a different thermistor. Be sure to check the one that comes with the HotEnd as it may be different if you've used a different link or bought it at a different time. Nearly all thermistors will be supported by Klipper, so no worries there, but be sure to check that it is specified properly in the printer.cfg file.

With this HotEnd installed, you should be able to exceed the stock max flow rates without any problems, and the heating/cooling times of the HotEnd will be dramatically faster. This alone makes using a Troodon Pro 2.0 a much nicer experience already.

NOTE: This HotEnd, like many others, comes with a silicone sock rated for 275C. A silicone sock rated for 300C is available separately from AliExpress if you plan on doing a lot of high-temperature printing. Or simply removing the sock is also an option. The main issue is that you don't want the sock to crumble and have bits of it fall into your print.

## Upgrade #2 - Bigger Heat Block
Next, let's try another variation of the same thing, but instead, let's use a larger heat block so we can get a better flow rate. With this configuration, it should be possible to hit a target flow rate of 20mm3/s, easily double what is possible with a stock HotEnd. There are other considerations when it comes to overall print speed, but this removes one of the key obstacles.
- Amazon 🇨🇦 - [Improved High Speed Fast Heat V6 HotEnd 24V 48W Ceramic Heater Core](https://a.co/d/0SKyygp)
- Triangle-Lab 🇺🇸 - [TZ V6 2.0 HotEnd](https://www.trianglelab.net/products/tz-v6-20-hotend)
- AliExpress - [Upgraded V6 HotEnd Kit](https://www.aliexpress.com/item/1005006642449636.html)
 
As with Upgrade #1, there is still some fiddling with the heater wire to get it to the right length. As it turns out, though, the larger heat block is offset by a shorter heat sink so the nozzle tip is positioned roughly at the same spot, which means there is no need to print a different StealthBurner duct to direct the part-cooling fan. This, too, is a drop-in replacement with minimal effort. 

The limitation here though is that the max temperature, while stated as 300C, is likely unachievable with the 48W heater. The heater block cools too quickly. 275C can be achieved (printing ASA) but realistically, 260C is likely the max functional temperature here. This is indeed quite workable, but this is what limits the flow rate to around 20 mm3/s for ASA instead of the rated 33 mm3/s that is advertised. Printing PLA at a much lower 220C-230C may be more in line with this advertised flow rate capability.

The other thing to be aware of is that this does take longer to heat up. Perhaps not surprising as it is a larger heat block, but it falls somewhere between the stock heater and Upgrade #1. Maybe closer to the stock heater. 

## Upgrade #3 - Bigger Heater, Better Paste
Using the same approach as #2, the heater supplied with that HotEnd was 48W. This can be directly upgraded to a 60W heater without changing the heat block or the thermistor and without having to redo the wiring that was done there - just replace the heater with a different one. This addresses the high-temperature limitation, as well as the heating time. With this heater, it is very quick to reach 275C. Just as quick as Upgrade #1.

- Amazon 🇺🇸 - [60W Ceramic Heater Blade](https://a.co/d/0hgVW8B)

Another consideration we've not yet touched upon relates to how heat conducts between different HotEnd elements. To increase conductivity, particularly between the heater and the heat block, but also between the thermistor and the heat block and between the heat break and the heater, a special thermal paste is used. Anyone who has put together a modern PC will be familiar with the thermal paste applied between the CPU and the heat sink or water block used in those environments. HotEnds often ship with a tiny packet of thermal paste. Tiny, but plenty enough for the size of the heater being used. 

But, as with all things, there are better products that can be used, specifically those with higher conductivity. The value we're interested in here is Watts per meter by Kelvin at 100C, or W/mK. Typical thermal paste is rated at around 4-5 W/mK and something like Copper is around 400 W/mK. Boron Nitride seems to be a popular choice for something like this. Is it worth the money? Hard to say. Certainly, for one printer printing exclusively PLA, it is likely overkill and whatever thermal paste comes with the HotEnd is likely to be plenty sufficient.

- Amazon 🇨🇦 - [Boron Nitride Thermal Paste](https://a.co/d/9qf7KV0)
- Amazon 🇺🇸 - [BN ThermoKote Paste](https://a.co/d/azjw1ds) 

## Other Considerations
The HotEnds we've covered here are intended to be drop-in replacements, so we don't need to print anything to get them up and running. This can also be critically important if your HotEnd has been damaged somehow (eg: Blob of Death) or if you've broken a heater or thermistor wire or something like that. There's nothing like needing to 3D print a part to get your 3D printer working again to ruin your day. With that in mind, it is a good idea to [print replacement parts](https://github.com/500Foods/WelcomeToTroodon/blob/main/docs/level_1/first_prints.md) in case you find yourself in such a position. Many toolheads are comprised largely of 3D printed parts, so printing up a complete replacement to have on hand isn't a terrible idea at all.

Moving on from these, the next class of HotEnds would likely be those that require different part-cooling fan ductwork. For example, a Volcano nozzle would extend lower than what it does in a stock configuration. This means that airflow will not be directed to where the nozzle is. Not too difficult to handle this, as there are numerous StealthBurner ducts that can be printed.

Next would be a higher-powered HotEnd. In the case of the Troodon 2.0 Pro, this would necessitate the need to run a pair of heater wires directly from the toolhead to the MCU in the electronics bay, bypassing the breakout board and its wiring entirely. This can be done relatively easily, using 18awg wire that can be run through the existing cable chains. Tedious but possible. The MCU that comes stock in the Troodon 2.0 Pro is rated for 24V at 5A, so 120W maximum, which covers most HotEnds. Even the Goliath HotEnd only draws 100W at 24V.

After sorting out the power situation, another stage would involve replacing the toolboard with either a CAN bus or USB-based toolboard. This would be primarily implemented so that the cable chains could be removed from the gantry. This is often desirable as it lightens the gantry considerably, which is another key factor when increasing print speeds. Note that this stage is often paired with replacing the power wiring, so this ends up being a bigger job than it might have been otherwise. But as the tasks have a lot of overlap, there's a lot of sense in doing both if either one is of interest.

And finally, replacing the extruder in the toolhead is also a popular option. And while extruders and HotEnds can often be mixed and matched, there are popular pairings that work better together, or, at the very least, *look* better together. Having an extruder that is under-powered for the HotEnd that is installed means that the overall print speed will be reduced to support the slowest component. Likewise, having an overpowered extruder compared to the HotEnd will also be less than ideal. Replacing the extruder usually ends up in a rabbit-hole situation where the toolboard also gets replaced, and then the wiring, and so on. 

Ultimately, there are a lot of individual pieces that can be upgraded, as we've shown here. Or if you know where you want to get to, you can just skip ahead and replace the entire toolhead right from the start. One of the key benefits of having a printer that is relatively open in its design, like a Troodon or a Voron, is that you have an endless array of inexpensive options available to you. There aren't really any proprietary parts that are going to get in the way, and the Klipper software supports nearly everything that is being brought to market.

#
Next: [TAP Upgrades](https://github.com/500Foods/WelcomeToTroodon/blob/main/docs/level_2/tap_upgrades.md)
